Good morning.
Please, please proceed.
It's also good to see, um, uh,
Nui Walters here too, from Labor.
So welcome.
Thank you, Morina Coto. Call Louisa Jolin ua.
My name is Louisa Jolin,
and I'm a member of the Law Society's Human Rights
and Privacy Committee.
With me this morning is Neil Russ, who's the convener
of the Law Society's Tax Committee.
Thank you very much for the invitation to come
and speak to the committee this morning about
the taxation bill.
Um, if I may start by briefly outlining the Law Society's
position, and then that will leave time for any questions
that you have for us.
Please, In all society's view is
that the approved information sharing agreements
or AA framework is the most appropriate information sharing
mechanism in this context.
In particular, ACEs contain essential safeguards to ensure
that personal information is appropriately protected.
The process that set out in this bill
amidst the usual important levels of oversight
and transparency, and it's also dispensing
with public consultation, which is vital
for achieving objectives like transparency,
public confidence, and external scrutiny.
The Law society is concerned about the precedent that's set
by circumventing the AA process
and with reference to the use of the phrase social license.
In the explanatory note to the bill,
the law society's view is that this language is problematic
and the integrity of the tax system shouldn't be contingent
on public tolerance for how much it can be weakened.
On the point of where the law society's view differs from
the Ministry of Justice's Bill of Rights Vet,
the ministry has not addressed Section 25 D of the Bill
of Rights, which is the right not to be compelled
to be a witness or to confess guilt.
And that's closely connected
with the privilege against self-incrimination
that's set out in the Evidence Act.
Fundamentally, this is about ensuring
that people are not required by the state
to provide information which might expose them
to criminal liability.
The law society's view is
that these issues might be triggered
by the information sharing that's proposed in the belt
and the proposition that information sharing is reasonably
justified because it's supports enforcement
of the law is circular in reasoning.
Lastly, the law society's view is that if the bill is
to proceed with section 18 hb,
then additional protection should be set out.
These are included in our submission at paragraph, uh,
13.14,
including requiring public consultation on an agreement
before it's finalized, requiring a privacy impact assessment
to be completed and consulted on together
with a draft agreement and providing for review
by the Privacy Commissioner of Agreements
that have been implemented.
We'd be happy to answer any questions that you have
for us on the Law society's behalf.
Okay. Members, uh, s questions for Louisa.
Can I also acknowledge, um, land Farm from the Green Party?
Thank you for your presence. Uh, any questions?
Okay, uh, Nui Walters, uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
And thank you very much for your submission.
Um, I do agree that there's potentially a problem in terms
of the right against self-incrimination.
I'm just wondering whether, um, the protections
that you've suggested are sufficient
in terms of addressing that.
It would seem that that remains an issue.
Um, I think part of my concern is the time at which
information would be gathered as well.
So, um, if, for example, the police were to make a request
after it's very clear to them that there appear
to be some issues and the information is is handed over
to them, um, that's one scenario.
It's, uh, it's more problematic in my view if there's a
conversation between police
and IRD about, um, for want of a better term, phishing
for information, um, that can then later be used.
And I just wonder if there's anything more explicit
that we could, um, propose in terms
of drawing down those powers of information gathering.
Well, to answer the first part of your question,
the additional safeguards
that are proposed in the law society's submission are
around the protection of personal information generally.
So they're not specifically addressing that issue
of self-incrimination.
Um, really it's the law society is quite generally concerned
to make sure that there are adequate safeguards against
self-incrimination in legislation generally,
and that's a thing that is common in submissions made
by the Law Society on similar, uh,
similar sorts of proposals.
So really we've raised it in the context of this bill
because we've noted that the ministry has not addressed it.
I think if you would like the Law Society to consider
that more specifically in terms of additional protections,
perhaps that could be put back to the law society
as a question that we can come back to you on in writing.
Thank you. I if
with the chair's permission, I think that would be useful.
Yes. Yep. Happy for that.
Please, if you can work with the, um,
Clark's office with that.
Uh, Louisa, thank you. Oh, we've just frozen.
Uh, Ms. Walters,
uh, was there a another supplementary question? Oui?
Uh, no, that's me. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Okay. Any, anyone else?
Uh, uh, in response to, um, the law Society's written
or, uh, verbal, um, submission.
Okay. And I see, uh, Neil, Russ there too.
I wanna acknowledge you as well. So, um, thank you.
Thank you for being well with inside your, um,
10 minute organizational, uh, submission window,
and we appreciate, uh, the effort that you've gone to.
Thank you. Thank you for your time.
Thank you. Okay, Mr. Uh, Mr.
Um, Clark, we've got, um, Kirk Hope
and others from the Financial Services Council of nz.
Uh, are they queued up for a 10 minute?
Yes, they're Mr. Chair, we just bring them in now.
Thank you.
Oh, Mr. Hope, very good to see you.
I know you've appeared in under a number of guises, uh,
to the FEC over a number of years.
Uh, good to see you with this hat on, of course, as, um, CEO
of, um, FSC.
So we're in your hands. Thank you for your submission.
Brilliant. Thanks Mr. Chair.
Um, I've got, joining me, Mike Woodbury from Chapman Trip,
who's gonna cover off, um, some of the technical aspects
of our submission around defined benefit schemes and,
and, uh, and some QE service stuff.
Um, look, thanks very much for the opportunity.
Um, I'll take, obviously our submission is, is read.
Um, just to cover a little bit of, of the FSC,
we've got a hundred over 110 members, man,
managing over a hundred billion in funds,
paying over 2.8 billion in, in claims annually.
And our members include life, health, uh, life
and health insurers, um, fund managers, uh, and KiwiSaver
and Workplace Savings Schemes, uh, and professional services
and technology providers.
So, uh, overall we are pretty supportive of the bill.
Um, in particular, we've got some comments around the area
of remedials for complying super funds, uh,
and consolidating defined benefit schemes.
Um, we obviously support the proposed changes
to the foreign investment Fund rules.
Um, there's a couple of areas we think that there might be,
uh, some opportunity for improvement.
Uh, we are looking for further clarification
and guidance from, uh, IR on,
on the unclaimed money re remedials.
Um, we would recommend an extension
of the implementation date
to allow industry readiness for that.
Um, there is other significant regulatory change in the
sector, and so these timeline changes need
to be considered a bit.
Um, just one area
that we focus on quite a lot in the bill, uh,
that we feel could have gone.
We, we, we feel the bill could have gone further on.
That's in relation to fringe benefit tax.
We've been working a lot in this space.
Um, the amendments are pretty narrow in scope, and,
and we think it's a missed opportunity to remove a key,
a key tax impediment to enabling particularly, um,
lower income employees to be able to access, uh, health
and life insurance, uh, through through group,
uh, employer schemes.
So FBT currently, um,
currently operates is a significant barrier for,
for employers to offer those to their employees as benefits.
Um, so we think there's a real opportunity there
and we would suggest that, um, new Zealand's a bit
of an outlier in this space.
Uh, many other OCD countries provide, uh,
or enable, uh, the provision of, of these sorts of products
through, uh, and,
and incentivize 'em through tax concessions.
Um, this isn't particularly a tax concession.
I mean, the, the, uh, previous government, uh, were,
were pretty happy to provide, for example, uh, um,
removal of FPT for public transport services,
uh, for employers.
So, you know, this is really about enabling people to
remain productive and, and working and healthy.
So, uh, we think that's a real missed opportunity.
Um, my other than that on, on this area, I might pass over
to Mike now to, to give you a bit more of a, uh,
technical feel for some of the components
around defined benefit schemes.
And, uh, so over to you, Mike, if you're there.
Okay, Mr. Wood?
Yes, thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Um, we warmly welcome the proposed Kiwi Saver
Remedials, which I'll deal with first.
As Kirk said, we'll take everything as read,
but the essence of those is
that in a workplace savings scheme,
which also has a KiwiSaver integrated complying fund section
with lock-ins to age 65, uh,
members in the employer can continue
with the current contribution streaming arrangements,
whereby only the portions of the members
and the employer's contributions, which each equal 3%
of salary need to be locked in.
And the, in each case,
considerable additional contributions can continue being
paid in accordance with the
somewhat more flexible workplace savings rules.
There are about 14 or so remaining complying super funds.
The the state sector dominated the biggest of unis,
my super, which is the a CC one in the Defense
Force Super scheme.
They are a grandfathered class of retirement scheme.
No more can ever be created.
And within them, the total balance is held on KiwiSaver
equivalent locked in terms,
or around 900 million for just over 12,000 members.
But the aggregate balances are considerably higher.
They're in the billions,
and total membership is also several multiples higher.
Uh, they all feature aggregate employer contribution rates
considerably higher than the KiwiSaver rate with few,
and with few exceptions, that'll remain the case.
Even if and when the, uh, KiwiSaver rates increase to say
6%, the average,
the aggregate employer contribution rate would probably be
in the order of about 10%.
So, um, these schemes exemplify good employer practice,
what's been proposed, um, enables them
to continue being key.
We say we're integrated in a way which
makes good common sense.
Um, we want them to keep on keeping on
because most also provide not only higher contribution
rates, but also premium free
or heavily discounted, um, group
and TPD insurance cover, which, um, Kirk just touched on.
So that's a very welcome change.
Um, we also welcome the agreed minor tweaks to the effect
that if all or any of the, just under 50
or so remaining legacy pension schemes,
workplace pension schemes in New Zealand, were were
to amalgamate into a special purpose
multi-employer master trust offered
by a commercial consolidator,
which would bring about much needed cost reduction
and administrative simplification benefits, then
that master trust would continue being taxed in the same way
as those pension schemes are currently, uh,
the employer sponsors are in functional
terms, life insurers.
Uh, and but sensibly those schemes currently have an
exemption from the life insurance tax regime.
The issue is that the qualifying condition is the pension
schemes must be single employer schemes.
This obviously guards against
a retail life insurer using the same model in substance.
The amendment will just say that the consolidation vehicle,
if it consists solely of those merged pension schemes,
will get the same tax treatment.
We don't know whether a consolidation will actually happen.
The schemes are only worth collectively a couple
of billion or thereabouts.
And overwhelmingly, they were closed
to new joiners 35 plus years ago when tax
exemptions fell away.
So they're a small sinking lid,
but this amendment is an important enabler.
So I'll leave it there and invite questions.
Okay. Thank you Mr. Woodbury. Thank you, Mr.
Hope I've got Dr. Deep. Deborah Russell.
Uh, thank you.
I just wanna, um, clarify something
around the public transport FPT exemption that was to do
with evening up the FPT exemption on car parks
provided by employers.
So it wasn't a concession, it was just trying
to even the playing field there in terms of the, um, FBT
of health insurance.
Um, have you costed that?
Yeah, we've done, um, a reasonable amount of work, uh,
and, and costing it.
So the, the costs are relatively fiscally neutral
for the government, and we've, we've
provided some, um, material, uh, to ministers and,
and to all political parties on it.
'cause it's, you know, it's something that really needs
to be thought about across the house.
Happy to, happy to, um, happy to pick that up
and provide, um, further information.
Of course, a large number of New Zealanders don't get
access to private health insurance no matter what
because of their employment.
Uh, the alternative is just
to fund the public system adequately so that, uh,
private insurance isn't needed.
Have you considered that as an option?
Well, I mean, I guess that's, that's the point really.
For some people who are sitting on wait lists
for considerable periods of time, they,
and they can't access the public system.
What we're saying is, you know, take, take some of
that pressure off the public system, enable, um,
particularly, uh, lower income, uh, workers
to access health insurance at a lower cost
through their employer, uh, group scheme.
So, uh, you know, that's, that's really the, the angle
that we are coming at it from.
But that money could just go straight into the public
health system so that the waiting list
didn't exist in the first place.
There's a, there's a, there's a, a, a, a policy issue here
as to whether we go private or public in the health system,
and I'm not sure we should be doing it through,
still through the FBT system.
Yeah, I mean, well that's, I guess that's
for governments to consider.
Really, uh, you know, what, what we're here to do is really,
uh, ensure that, you know,
new Zealanders in particular have, have access to, uh,
the types of products and services
that people have in other jurisdictions.
All New Zealanders, or just the ones who are unemployment.
Well, I mean, certainly the, um, the,
the scope of employer based schemes is, is
for those people in employment.
So I, this goes
to the point point I'm making is you're making a fundamental
change to the nature of the way
that we collectively provide health in the system via a
stealth system, uh, stealth move via FBT.
It's not something I could support.
Thank you. Okay. Any, anyone else members?
Not that I can see. We'll just do a quick peruse. Okay.
Look, thank you Mr. Hope. Thank you Mr.
Woodbury, for your, um, submission on behalf of FSC, uh,
and all the best for the rest of the week. Thank
You. Thanks. Thanks. Motion.
Okay. Thank you. Okay.
Uh, Mr. Clark, have we got N-Z-I-E-R? Uh, queued up?
We're running nice and early.
Yeah, so just bring them in now.
Thank you.
We've got, I, uh, here, Cameron.
Well, I can't see them on screen. Um,
Do you have a, Okay.
Yeah. Uh, okay. Yeah, yeah. I know.
I was wasn't, they weren't coming up on main screen. Okay.
Okay. Thank you, Peter. Thank you, Julie. Thank you.
Uh, Deborah. Um, so welcome.
Just to give some context here, um, team, uh,
as you would've seen in, uh, in, uh, the N Z's, um,
submission, uh, this is exclusively concerned, uh,
with the proposed amendments, uh, to the foreign investment,
um, fund regime.
Uh, an interested group of parties has commissioned, uh, uh,
N-Z-I-E-R to, to, um, put this submission together.
So we, we await it with interest.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and, and members. Yes.
We just wanna talk about the, um, the FEC, um,
provisions, and we'll take it
that you've read the submission.
So we won't go through it in detail.
We'll just highlight the main points.
Our summary points up, up front is
that the, the current FIF regime is discouraging globally
mobile talent from coming to New Zealand.
That includes, uh, not just immigrants,
but also returning Kiwis
and Kiwis building innovative firms here.
Now, the bill is better than the status quo,
but we think it doesn't go far enough.
We think the focus should be very much on the,
the impact of the fifth regime on high growth firms that are
reducing weightless services,
because that is a very exciting
economic development opportunity for New Zealand.
And if we can grow that as well as the rest of the economy,
then that would be a very good thing.
We think that the modified fifth settings in the bill still
discourage, um, people from coming to New Zealand,
and therefore it should be seen as a, as a first step
and not as a complete solution.
And we've outlined some amendments in, uh, in our submission
that we'd recommend, uh, the committee, um, consider.
Some of those are things that could go in the current bill.
Others are things that we'd, we'd recommend
that you encourage officials
and the government to start work on, uh,
as a matter of priority.
So that's our overall summary, and,
and if you've got any questions about
details, we can go through that. Right. Thank
You, Mr. Wilson. We've got
Dr. Deborah Russell.
Um, thank you for the submission.
Um, it's an interesting one
'cause I, I, I recognize the problem that's trying
to be solved, and we do need
to do something about the fifth rules.
Just, um, and thank you for your suggestions around it.
Um, I was just, uh, one of the things is
that this new RAM method won't apply to people
who are already here.
And you say that one of the motivations
for these new rules is to encourage people to come here.
So if people are already here,
clearly they haven't been discouraged already,
they are here, um, do you just, there's a little bit
of a Yes.
Attention there.
So how would you then justify applying it to people
who are already here,
even though we don't no longer need to attract them?
Uh, it's to stop them leaving.
Okay. Put, put simply, um, if, if, if they become,
if they, uh, want to go and,
and, uh, start a business overseas, uh, or want to stay here
and start a business OO overseas,
then the fifth rules will apply to them.
And, and that will discourage them from, from staying.
And we've certainly met a, a number
of people who that is the case.
Do I was gonna say, do you have, um, evidence
that that is actually happening?
Yes, we have. We, we've talked in,
in preparing this submission,
and in our reports, we've talked to quite a number of, um,
people who are in this situation impacted by the regime.
Julie Fry, my colleague lives in New York
and has talked a lot of them there.
We've talked to industry associations.
This is, this is a material issue
that is impacting on a number of, of people
who want desperately to come
and live in New Zealand or state. No,
But I'm not talking about the people who want
to come and live.
I want to talk about the people who,
so I recognize that point.
Yeah. If you've got evidence around people who are here
and are leaving because of the fifth rules. Yeah.
So, um, I spoke, I spoke with, um, 25 people
for the initial report that we wrote,
and two of those have already left.
Right. Okay. Thank you. That's what
I was looking forward just as a, just
as an indication. Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you. Okay.
We've got our deputy chair, Ryan Hamilton.
Uh, thank you. Thanks for your submission.
Just when you talk about the double taxation,
and obviously this sort of targets American, um,
internationals, but, um,
why do you think the focus has just been on Americans?
Was there another high sort of demographic
that you think should have been included?
Uh, I, I think a lot of the focus is on Americans
because of, of, of the US tech sector.
Um, but I I, I would not like the bill to, to really be,
be picking favorites.
And I think it should apply universally, uh, certainly to,
um, there are people who are working in
and from, um, Singapore, for example, the uk.
Um, but our, our general proposition is
that rather than just focus on, on one jurisdiction and,
and perhaps, uh, give you the preference,
the the rule should apply where possible broadly.
And that'll allow people to make decisions about
where they want to run their businesses
that aren't, uh, tax driven.
Okay. Thank you. Thanks, chair.
Okay. Thank you. Any other questions, members?
No, I think we'll leave it there.
So, um, thank you, um, Peter Wilson
and Julie Fright, um, from N-Z-I-E-R on that submission.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members.
Thank, thank you for your time. Okay.
Uh, Mr. Clark, have we got, uh, Katrina Evans from the, uh,
privacy Foundation nz?
Uh, is she in the, in the waiting room?
Yes, she's there now. Thank you. Okay.
Uh, good morning Ms. Evans.
We look forward to your submission.
Thank you for the, um, for your written,
Um, good morning to the committee.
Thanks very much for the opportunity to talk to you.
Um, as our submission notes, we are focused on, um,
so jump jumping within the bill for you on clause 1, 4 3,
um, which is the information sharing clause,
the proposed new agreements between ministers.
Um, as we said in our submission, um,
the Privacy Foundation supports responsible information
sharing across government.
I've personally been involved, um, as a,
as a privacy advisor in government for many, many years,
and have been, uh, have been sort
of deeply involved in information sharing agreements.
It's, it's essential that we
share information across agencies where that's appropriate.
Privacy's not about keeping things secret,
it's not about keeping things off limits.
It's about ensuring that people's, uh,
information is properly respected and protected.
And in the government context where people have no choice
but to provide their information, uh, very often I don't,
I don't have a choice about whether I provide my information
to inline revenue, nor should I.
Um, it's about maintaining trustworthy relationships
with people, uh, as a, as sort of,
I'm obviously not gonna read out the submission,
but, uh, the house recently considered obviously the
regulatory standards bill,
and I wonder whether there were some pal, uh,
now the Regulatory Standards Act,
I wonder whether there were some parallels here
that might be helpful, regardless of what,
whether one agrees with the contents of the bill or not.
And I know there were different opinions, you know,
within the house on that it's common ground
that it's really important to have good laws
and good regulation.
Um, there are two aspects of that
that are particularly relevant, we think, to this clause.
The first is it shouldn't double up what you already have.
And as we pointed out in our submission,
there's already a regime under the Privacy Act,
the what's called the AA regime
that approved information sharing agreements
to support public services.
You, it can, uh, cater for two way shares,
which this clause doesn't do.
It only talks about disclosures by and inland revenue.
What if an agency wants to
receive information from inland revenue?
It can also, the asa regime can also include non-government
agencies as parties, as long
as it's government agency in the lead.
So it's very flexible.
Um, also for good law, you need
to have a really clear purpose for what you're doing,
and the content of that law needs
to be adequate for that purpose.
And our submission points out various ways in which, um,
it is our view that these, these, this clause 1, 4 3
does not go far enough, uh,
particularly no public consultation, uh, no opportunity
for people to say if information about them is incorrect.
Um, that's the, your, uh, before,
before action is taken against them.
We don't wanna be in a robo jet situation, right.
People have to have an opportunity to, to comment,
comment and various other points.
Reporting is, is not adequately catered for by the bill.
Um, and with that, I'd like to pass the committee
for any questions that you might have.
Th thank, thank you. I'm gonna go to, uh, Nui Walters.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
And thank you very much for your submission.
I don't know if you heard the Law Society submission
earlier, but they were raising similar issues.
Right. And we're going to go in
and have a look at whether it's possible
to look at the language of this bill.
I tend to agree with you that the better model is, uh,
the information sharing agreements, which look to me to be,
um, a far better process
and indeed exclusion of the Privacy Act provisions
where there are exclusions are done by order
and counsel, aren't they within that process?
Yes. Fantastic. Um,
and the, I did have a question around IPP three A,
and it's the application to this bill if it's passes as is.
Um, so obviously there's a concern about whether
individuals are notified.
Would they still, even if it's not in the language
of this bill, they would still be required to be
notified under I IPP three A? Wouldn't they?
That would be my understanding, yes.
Okay, fantastic. And one more, Mr.
Chair, if that's, um, please. Alright.
In terms of an agency, so say police customs
or the SFO making a request for the collection
of information, is that
provided for an existing information sharing agreements?
Uh, it can be.
So for example, one of the,
as we pointed out in our submission, uh, one of the reasons
for that, uh, ministers can enter into agreements is for,
uh, you know, enforcement for, you know,
serious crime, for example.
And there are existing ACEs that allow for that.
So there's little reason why if those don't cover it,
why you couldn't adjust them to bring in extra parties
or, you know, o
otherwise sort of tweak their contents to fit, for example,
a new technology environment.
You may want to do things in slightly different ways.
We want to take advantage of that.
There's no reason why you can't develop and amend those.
And there's already the inland revenue MSD agreement as well
for protection of public revenue, uh,
through, through benefits. So, yeah.
Thank you. And am I correct that
that's not the case in terms that is the case
or it's not the case in terms of the language of this bill?
So being able to, those agencies being able to request the
Connection, the agencies can't,
under this provision request information as we read it,
it talks about disclosure, disclosure,
disclosure from a non-revenue.
Okay. Thank you. That's useful.
Thank you. Ms. Evans.
Could you just give us a, just to better understand this,
a a hypothetical example of where a, uh,
privacy breach could be materially harmful, uh,
when information is, uh, shared across government agencies,
not just a privacy breach,
but where is materially harmful, uh, to, to New Zealanders?
So you, can you give a plot, give us a, paint us an example
of where that could, where
that could happen and what it would look like?
So one of the main things you have to watch out for,
I've been, as I said, I've been personally involved
with developing these kind of agreements, is, um,
whether the systems operate,
whether the systems in each agency
actually operate together well.
Um, and you can get inaccuracy
of information, um, oh, sorry.
Inaccuracies with the information could crop up if your,
if your match criteria are not sufficiently, um, accurate,
for example, and that might mean that, um, inland revenue
or the receiving agency could get information that is not
accurate enough for its purpose.
It has to spend a lot of time, it has to spend a lot
of resources in sorting out those,
those accuracy issues.
Um, and, and sort of checking the data, um,
rechecking the data, possibly changing the data, um,
that is, it is inefficient.
And so one of the things that you always have
to think about is, is how accurate is it?
Um, as far as harming New Zealand goes, um,
I, I suggest that if we had a situation such as robo debt
in New Zealand, um, then that has a significant impact,
not only on the privacy of the individuals,
but also on the country as a whole. Excuse me.
Okay. We'll, we'll leave it at that.
Thank, thank you for appearing
before us, uh, uh, Katrina Evans, uh, chair
of the Privacy Foundation nz
and thank you for your written submission as well.
You're welcome. Thank you very much
For today. Thank you.
Okay.
Uh, Liam, have we got rewiring out here? Rowa?
Are they queued up?
Uh, no, not yet. We're about 10 minutes ahead of time,
so I don't think we're here yet.
Okay. Okay. Well, should we, um, should we, let's just,
uh, we, we we're due for a little bit of a break.
Let's take a 10 minute break to 10 45, 8 minutes.
Uh, and we'll be back ready to roll then.
That's the break for the morning. Thank you. Thanks, Mr.
Chair.
Okay.
Right. Members? It's 10 45.
Sorry, Mr. Chair. We still don't have rewiring here. Okay.
We weren't able to get in touch with 'em.
We did give them a call and they didn't respond,
so don't know if they'll turn up.
Okay. Um, have we got anyone else queued up?
No. Barbara Gilchrist isn't due till 11, so,
Okay. Well, could we
go in
and, um, could we bring that item forward?
Who have we got as far as members go?
It's a non-controversial item.
We've got Deborah here, haven't we? Um,
Well, sorry, I'm talking about if you're gonna do Yeah,
Yeah, yeah. I, I know that, um,
I'm just saying, should we, if
with the Scott Simpson Amendment paper
and letter, um, should we, uh, should we talk about
that in private now and then that clears the decks
and then come back, uh, well and truly ahead of 11?
Yep, we can do that. Okay. So I just
Wanna move across to the private. Yeah.
Yep. So me members, we're going to item five,
which was scheduled for hub past 12.
It's, uh, hopefully a non-controversial, um, item.
Uh, so we'll see you in private. Thank you.
Are we in the private or the public here? Cameron?
I
Are you good to get call for?
Excellent. Thank you. What's that?
Okay. Right.
Uh, have we did rewiring out here? Rowa?
Uh, are they on queue there? Let's have a look.
Uh, no, we didn't get them in the end,
but we do have, uh, Kathleen Ryan,
who's here, not Barbara Gilchrist.
Okay. Uh, let's bring in Ms. Ryan. Ms. Ryan.
Okay. I can see you. Um, Kathleen, welcome.
We are now live streaming.
We are, we are back on to the taxation bill, uh, hearings.
Um, you have got an individual submission here that we've,
uh, take, we can take as read,
and we look forward to your five minute presentation.
Thank you very much. I'm an older Kiwi
who was brought up in a country where the gap between rich
and poor was about five and a half times.
And that meant that we were a very
easy society to live in
because everybody had their basic needs met.
I'm concerned that this bill undermines re
well fairness and equity in the tax system by
limiting or actually denying IRD,
the ability to research the tax
of high net worth individuals
and to look at the kind of tax that they pay
and the kind of tax that the poor people pay.
For example, when labor change section
and it reduced 17 gb, it enabled
IRD to look at the amount
that high net worth individuals paid in tax, they pay
around about 9% on average compared with about 20,
20% for poor people.
Now, that situation has since been compounded
by 68% of the tax cuts going
to the top 40% of income earners.
And it's no wonder our society has been dragging
along because if you give more of the tax cuts to lower
and middle income, new Zealanders without much money,
they will spend it
because their pent up demand is quite great,
and that helps turn the wheel, the wheels of the economy.
Whereas for richer people, what do they do?
Well, they pay down their mortgages or they invest.
So I want to see section 17
GB retained.
I also want to see fairness for overseas people who come
to New Zealand, and they may be Kiwis,
who generally live abroad, who are, um, working
for overseas employers.
And that can be done quite simply.
And others have explained how. So I won't go into it.
And I think it's only fair that if somebody has
say 20 rental properties
and puts, um, electricity on all of them,
that there'd be a cap on the amount
of tax they are exempt from, from the total
electricity generated, I accept there should be some cap,
and I accept that they should get credit for having put that
electricity collection system on their roofs or wherever.
Mm-hmm. I completely oppose
the use of IRD data for, for non-tax purposes.
That goes against a long held principle that
that tax data is simply used for tax purposes.
I gave the example in my submission of
before the legalization of prostitution,
that prostitution prostitutes could pay their taxes knowing
that their data was not going to be given to the police
or any other agency or leaked to the public.
I think it's important that tax data
is exclusively used for tax purposes
and that ministers are not able to share it
around the cabinet table or two, um, individual departments.
And I got a shock when I realized we had,
what is it something like 426,000 trusts
that, um, hold
around $528 billion in them.
I think it's important that we continue
to require all trusts to make an annual disclosure
to IRD,
and that is the only place we get information on trusts.
If we did something similar to the company's act,
then I wouldn't have such a problem, though.
I think it's important we know how much is in those trusts.
So I oppose those sections of this taxation bill
because I want to ensure
a little bit more fairness in the taxation system.
I'm, uh, happy to answer your questions.
Uh, thank you very much, uh, Kathleen,
and thank you for your very comprehensive
and thoughtful, um, uh, individual submission members.
Have we got any additional questions
or points of clarity that you need to seek from Kathleen?
Uh, Deborah Russell. Doctor,
Uh, thank you for your submission, cath.
Oh, sorry. Thank you for your submission, Kathleen.
Um, I, I take your point about the rental properties,
um, with the landlord issue,
but have you worked out the extent of that,
whether it's likely, our feeling is
that the costs associated with installing solar is likely
to outweigh the amount of income generated anyway.
Well, that's true in the first few years,
and I do think landlords should be given,
or landlady should be given credit for wanting
to make the homes more energy efficient,
um, and to protect their rentees from power cuts
because it would mean there'd be a minimum of electricity.
But you are looking at a long-term investment
and the cost of solar has come down drastically.
So I still think it makes sense to ensure that is a cap,
particularly once the asset has been paid off, um,
that ensures, um, that there is a reasonable
cap, um, and that then it's counted towards taxation.
It's, it's an equity issue.
Thank you. Okay. Okay. Thank, thank you Kathleen.
Thank you for, uh, all the work you put into that,
um, submission.
And thank you for appearing
before the committee, uh, this morning.
My pleasure. Enjoy your day. Thank you.
It same to you. Thank you.
Okay, Mr. Clark, who have we got up next?
Oh, we've got Marilyn Head here from the yearly, uh, meeting
of New Zealand Quakers, Marilyn.
Sure. I can, we can see you for sure. Can
You hear me now? Uh,
we can hear you and, uh,
you've got 10 minutes, so we're in your hands.
Well, I don't think I'll take 10 minutes,
but Tu Marilyn, I'm here
representing Tahi Tu Quakers New Zealand.
And thank you very much for the opportunity to speak
to our very brief submission.
Um, I'm going to just get a little bit background about the
Quakers and then talk to the two clauses 1, 4 1 and 1 4 3
and the purpose of taxation in general.
Um, the Religious Society of Friends
to give us our formal name of is almost the sole survivor
of many religious and free thinking sex
that formed in the inter that little period
between King Charles I first and, um, uh, uh,
and King Charles II
and the 17th century, um, the,
the Cavaliers and the Round Heads.
If you remember your history, um,
quake has successfully negotiated a path of non-violence
and toleration between these warring political
and religious ideologies.
Um, as one of the founding members said, we are not
for names nor titles of government, government,
nor are we for this party, nor against the other,
but we are for justice.
And it's this that compels us to address you today.
Quaker influence in the abolition of slavery, penal reform
and advocacy for peace, equity
and social justice is widely recognized, less well known
as our advocacy for tax justice.
Though, uh,
a few individual Quakers have often protested the use
of taxation for weapons and, uh, supporting a standing army.
Quakers have no creed,
but a deep conviction of the inherent worth
and dignity of all people.
Taxation is the primary instrument for the fair distribution
and redistribution of wealth so that all citizens,
regardless of economic health
or social status, can participate
and benefit from the finite resources
of this planet that we share.
We do not own. In the wealthiest 10% owns over
half the country's wealth, while 90% share.
The rest, uh, needless to say,
it's the poor 10% have the least
and the disparity continues to grow.
Um, recently I read that over the past 10 years, the wealth
of the top 10% of tassels has grown by about two
and a half million, while the debt of the poorest 10%
of households has grown by about $31,000.
Uh, we urge a committee
to consider whether the proposals in this omnibus bill will
bring us any closer to a more equitable society
is it's not just, um, in New Zealand
that there is growing inequality, but also globally.
And we can see that this inequity has been accompanied
by a growing social division
and increasingly extreme behavior, more militarism,
and basically the indifference
or the impotence of international bodies
to maintain peaceful justice.
You know, taxation to, uh, reduce inequity,
uh, provides a mechanism to achieve, uh, not only fairness,
but also greater social cohesion and participation.
And it's disappointing that Arturo continues to lag
behind comparable countries in ensuring a fair taxation
system so that the country can flourish.
Needless to say, we are not tax expert,
but we can see that repealing clause one four at
that clause, 1 4 1 repealing, um, section 17 GB of the,
um, tax Administration Act alongside clause 1 4 3,
inserting a new section in, uh, um,
in practice will alter the responsibility, um, and, and,
and, um, costs of information sharing in favor
of the wealthy at the expense of the poor.
Subsequent to the introduction of section 17 gb,
the IRD was able to gather information which evidenced
for the first time, basically what merely suspected
that the rate of taxation proportional to income
to wealth was hugely disparate
with the wealthy paying a fraction, um, of the proportion
that, um, ordinary PAYE, um,
um, citizens paid.
I don't understand,
or we don't understand why you would remove such a valuable
tool that has delivered such tangible results.
Um, clause 1 4 3 by comparison gives the IRD the ability
to share information without scrutiny
as the privacy commissioner reminds us.
Because the commissioner's ev advice is not binding.
It's no secret that there's a significant difference in the
information the government holds on people drawing a benefit
working for wages
or in care then that held on people of independent means.
You know, together with both of these, um, clauses,
the balance of responsibility
and burden of information sharing
favors the wealthy at the expense of the poor.
Um, just unnecessary.
Um, the importance of, um, you know, I, um,
inland revenue confidentiality is something that is, um,
has been wide widely upheld
and is, um, you know, most tax experts, um, have spoken
in favor of this, the how important it is to maintain
that confidentiality.
So, um, basically we would, um, suggest that, uh,
the committee considers in, in the general sense, um,
whether this, uh, bill is introducing any form
of redistribution fairness in the, um, at, at,
at of taxation.
And, um, and we would like, um, both, uh, clauses 1, 4 1
and 1 4, 3 not to proceed. Thank you for listening.
Oh, thanks Marilyn. Have we got any questions
or points of c clarity that need to be sought?
No, we haven't. Thank you for your, um, your,
your written submission and your verbal submission.
Marilyn, we, we wish you all the best
and we can only assume that King Charles III is kind of, uh,
uh, reignited your organization again.
Indeed. Thank you. Okay. Thank you.
Okay, Mr. Clark, who have we got, um, queued up now?
Next?
Oh, we've got the taxpayer next.
Uh, yep. We have, we have, we have, we have. Okay.
Bring them through.
Okay.
Excellent. I can see the boardroom.
Yes. Thank you. Um,
and Jordan should be joining shortly as well.
Um, he's in the Auckland office.
Very good. Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Good morning, members of the, uh, committee.
Good morning. Uh, Basically our key points,
um, that I'd like to briefly address, um, uh,
revolve around our strong support for the repeal
of Section 17 GB of the Tax Administration Act.
Um, officials should never be empowered
to go on fishing expeditions
and, um, despite what, uh, uh,
some previous submitters have said, um, the results
of the exercise that section 17 gb,
um, uh,
provided accuracy, uh, for, um,
could have been roughly derived.
And I think everyone really understood that, uh,
untaxed income from high, uh,
income earners means their effective tax rate is lower than,
uh, wage and salary earners.
I don't think 17 GB is necessary to establish that.
Um, and so we support, strongly support its repeal.
Um, we strongly oppose the
ministerial proposed ministerial agreements, taxpayer.
In fact, this points, this goes
to a much wider concern we have, um, with
where the government and the,
and the Inland Revenue Department are going around, uh,
confidentiality of taxpayer information.
Um, taxpayer information is confidential
to the Inland Revenue Department.
The ACT requires this, um,
we don't believe IRD should be used as a data warehouse
for the rest of government.
The approved information sharing arrangements
that already exist are bad enough,
but the proposed, um, ministerial agreements exclude
what little public scrutiny the ACEs are subject to.
And the privacy commissioner has already raised concerns,
um, about this.
The late state inclusion in the bill reeks of deviousness
to evade proper public scrutiny.
Um, we think this is actually rather shocking.
Um, the taxpayer Union has major concerns
that the government and commissioner have completely lost
sight of inland revenue's fundamental purpose, which is
to protect tax revenue and the integrity of the tax system.
Voluntary compliance with tax legislation is a key feature
of the regime and is undermined
of taxpayer's information does not remain confidential
to inland revenue.
And just as a, as a related aside, uh, when one
of my father's clients would ring up
and say, I'm being charged, one
of the first questions he would ask is,
have you paid your taxes?
And if they said yes, he said that's good,
because we don't have
to worry about inland revenue investigation as well.
Public institutions are
amongst the least secure in the country,
and we're not just talking about cyber vulnerabilities,
but errors made by fairly low level staff.
Do you seriously think taxpayers will be happy
with their confidential information distributed
throughout government?
And, uh, we've actually been quite shocked
by the actions that we found, um, uh, only a year ago that,
uh, the commissioner has been passing confidential taxpayer
information to social media companies for inland's revenues,
uh, purported, uh, compliance purposes.
Um, we think the cavalier attitude being shown
by inland revenue means that, um, we're struggling
to have any trust, uh, in their, um, ability
or willingness to protect,
to protect confidential taxpayer information.
Um, and we have even more concerns if this has been
distributed throughout government.
You only have, and we're not talking about willful,
deliberate, um, uh, um, uh,
improper actions, just accidental stuff.
I mean, just the other day we've had, uh, uh,
information released under the, uh, official Information Act
that identified, um, claimants and sexual abuse, uh, issues.
The names were not redacted. Now that's clearly an error.
The more of this information that gets released, um,
to other agencies outside of inland revenue,
the greater the likelihood of leaks occurring.
And, um, the less likely you are
to have taxpayers in gray areas,
illegal areas, actually vol wishing to voluntarily disclose,
um, uh, what income they're receiving.
And that, uh, provi
and that places, um, it, it,
it will lessen IRDs tax collection, um, abilities.
So we strongly, uh, in our view,
um, the ministerial agreements should not be
in this bill at all.
If there is a serious proposal to, um, look at this,
it really has to go through,
does the generic tax policy, uh, process.
And increasingly we're seeing, uh, um,
proposals going forward in legislation that haven't been
through the GTPP.
Um, and that is a major concern.
So their, their end of, um, my
Presentation. Okay.
Uh, we've got Dr. Russell with a hand up.
I don't quite agree with you on 17 GB
because I think it, um, is a valuable tool,
but it needs more protections about it.
But I'm gonna say for the rest of it,
I think this is a first one.
I've just thoroughly agreed with the taxpayers Union.
I just thought you'd like to know that.
Thank you. Well, um, achievement unlocked Dr. Russell.
Yeah. Oh,
Wow. Well, that, that's
all in public arena too, so you,
they can put it on their socials. Uh, Dr. Russell
Might be a last as well, so let's get carried away.
If, if I may chair, if, if, if time allows. Yes, it does.
I mean, just, just the view of this from the,
from 40,000 feet is twofold from
the taxpayers in your perspective.
The first is the point of principle around protection
of data and, and the, like, of course,
we require taxpayers required to give the information.
It should have a very high
threshold and for the protection of it.
The, the second, um, is really around,
and this is what I think frankly in the 12 years,
the taxpayers union, I think
that IRD have now really dropped the ball on this,
and is that they used to be very protective
of the information
because they saw their key role as protecting the integrity
and the ability of the crown to raise revenue first
and foremost, and would be quite
defensive of the information.
And other departments try to use it as a data warehouse
for that reason alone.
That is totally gone.
My organization exposed them a year ago,
and I had the most extraordinary situation
of the commissioner accusing me
and my organization of misinformation,
of misleading the public despite multiple letters,
despite lawyers letters.
Never been able to say what we misled on simply refuses,
which I think for someone I get,
some departments are more political,
but for one of the most senior bureaucrats in the, in,
in the country to say that, um, for what is the key consumer
and stakeholder organization, I can sit outrageous.
And despite, and this is, um, not public information,
but despite numerous lawyers, letters
and approach to the minister, um, I can tell you
that at the same time that we, the very day we launched
that campaign criticizing IRD for, uh, giving
as turned out to be true, it was much worse than
what we'd accused them of the
misinformation was actually the other way.
Um, officials within IRD, uh,
accessed my personal tax records
and the records of the taxpayer's union in the 48 hours
that followed, I believe it was seven times.
We've had lawyers write to IRD
and request the information for that.
We have raised it with the minister.
And here I am 13 months later,
and I have absolutely no, uh, assurances
or information, sorry.
No, I have an assurance that it's all appropriate.
That was the, that's IRD,
but they won't give me any information as
to why it was accessed.
I chair the, um, the, um, association
of taxpayer groups around the world.
I am very, um, will taxpayers associations.
It is common in some countries for advocates
to have their, uh, affairs looked into
by revenue services for political reasons.
I'm deeply ashamed that that has happened in New Zealand
or appears to have happened in New Zealand.
And I would encourage, I'm left with no, um, option,
but to raise it with the select committee
because having raised it with the department,
having raised it with the minister, I still have no answers.
And I, I, I know it is slightly adjacent to this bill,
but it raises the identical questions around is IRD
taking its responsibilities
and its constitutional responsibility, frankly,
of protecting taxpayer information seriously.
And I, so I think that is an even more important question
before you take the leap that this bill does
and provide other agencies with that taxpayer information.
Okay. Thank you, Mr. Williams.
Have we got any other points, uh,
or questions that need to be raised, uh,
by either your organization, um, or, uh, or,
or by me, members of the committee?
And look, um, Mr. Williams, you know, we, we invite you,
if you haven't already, to, to raise any issues
that you have through, through the Minister for Revenue
or through the chief executive of, uh, IRDI.
I have, I mean, we, we have,
we didn't get a response from the minister's
office are very disappointed.
Okay. Um, I, I will, um, I will instruct the, the lawyers
to share the information with, with, with, through you, Mr.
Chair.
Okay. Well, we'll, we'll receive,
we'll receive the information as is your,
as is your right to send us.
Um, any, any questions? No.
Mr. Chair? Yes. Uh, UCH Walters,
Uh, just a suggestion that, um,
it may be worthwhile contacting the Ombudsman if there's a
concern there that may be.
We've got, we've got actually about we, uh,
the, I can't remember.
I think it's about 8,000 people that have filed complaints
with the Privacy Commissioner.
Mm-hmm. Uh, on this matter, the, the key, the
original matter, which was the sharing with the, um,
social media companies.
And it was only a month ago.
It's been allocated an investigator.
Okay. Okay. Right. Well, thank you. Thank you.
Um, uh, to the Taxpayers Union, thank,
thank you both gentlemen, uh, for your submission
and raising your concerns.
Um, we look forward to receiving any additional information
that you have said that you may send us.
Um, and, uh, uh, we'll leave it at that.
Thank you. Thank
You. Thank you. Thanks both.
Okay.
Uh, Mr. Clark, have we got, uh, anyone
that we might've missed before
or have we got, uh, taxi Limited?
Josh Taylor, co-founder, queued up?
I am queued up. Mr. Chair? Yes, Josh. Okay.
Josh, you've got, um, 10 minutes.
Uh, we're bang on time,
so we look forward to your submission.
Wonderful. Uh, thank you. Uh, Mr.
Chair Committee members, um,
taxi was a FinTech launched in 2024
to help New Zealand businesses with what is their, uh,
still their single biggest challenge access to capital.
When I was here last year, uh,
before this committee, uh, we talked about how taxi works.
Uh, since then, we've advanced over 12 million in loans, uh,
to New Zealand businesses.
And we've seen a 99.75% repayment rate.
That's not theoretical. Uh, that's hundreds
of real businesses employing real people who've been able
to keep trading, hire staff and grow.
But there is a problem that figure would be five times
higher, if not for a technical barrier
that unfairly disadvantages smaller
or less advised businesses.
This is is the number of customers
who have currently signed up to Taxi
but cannot yet take advantage of it
because advisors did not make them, um, uh,
did not advise them, um, of the benefits of paying
through a tax pooling intermediary when they paid their tax.
Under the current law, only businesses
that pay their provisional tax
through a tax pooling intermediary can borrow against this
tax using taxi or similar services.
If you've paid your tax directly to Inland Revenue, uh,
which most smaller businesses do, you are locked out.
You can't later transfer that payment into a tax pool
and unlock the working capital you've already earned.
Now, on paper, that might sound like a matter of process,
uh, but in practice it's about privilege.
Now, the difference between those who benefit
and those who miss out isn't intent
or honesty or credit worthiness.
Uh, it is the quality of advice they received
before they made the payment.
Uh, and that's, uh, the heart at,
that's at the heart of this inequity.
Not all accountants are equal.
The big firms and well connected advisors know about tax
pooling and use it automatically so to the big corporates,
uh, but many small or regional accountants don't, uh,
their clients often small family businesses, uh,
just pay their tax, uh, in the normal way,
but then everything right, yet they're excluded from the
same opportunity simply
because their accountant didn't tick a different box.
So I ask, should a business miss out on Vital Working
Capital because their advisor didn't know
or didn't ask the right questions?
Should the ability to weather a downturn, uh,
and we all need more of this right now, uh,
depend on whether you could afford a good accountant, uh,
or, or have an internal finance team.
We don't think so. Taxi is asking for a simple fair change,
uh, to allow any taxpayer who's paid provisional tax
directly to Inland Revenue to transfer
that payment into a tax pooling account while
retaining the original payment date.
The government's new investment boost lets businesses claim
an extra 20% upfront tax deduction on eligible new assets on
top of normal depreciation.
Treasury expects this will lift GDP by
around 1% over 20 years at a fiscal cost
of about 1.7 billion a year, and a 0.4% lift in GDP.
Um, in the first four years.
By contrast, taxi taps into 18 billion
of currently sitting idle at inland revenue in
provisional tax payments.
And NZ i's modeling, uh, has shown
that at scale this could generate between nine
to 10.8 billion a year in GDP uplift,
which is equivalent to 2.6%.
Um, which, uh, at, at a cost
and lost tax revenue based on our observed repayment rate
of $14.5 million annually,
14.5 million, uh, potential costs
to achieve a $10.8 billion gain in GDP compares very
favorably, uh, to the investment boost, uh, cost
of 1.7 billion
to achieve 1.6 billion over the first four years.
Both place a cost on the tax system, but they're not equal.
We have the data to support this.
Uh, and this policy change, uh,
we believe will be a strong net contributor to the economy.
Uh, and it does level the playing field.
It gives every provisional taxpayer big
or small, the same access to lower cost working capital.
We're seeing what capital injection can do.
Taxi can deliver the same effect, uh, through the, in terms
of capital injection with, uh,
investment boost Taxi can deliver the same effect
through the private sector for almost no fiscal cost.
Um, if only the rules are even.
Because at the end of the day, fairness
and business shouldn't depend on the
size of your accounts firm.
It should depend on your effort, your integrity,
and your willingness to pay your tax not on
someone else's shortcomings.
Thank you.
Okay, thank you, Josh.
I've got, uh, Ryan Hamilton with his hand up.
Thanks, chair. Uh, thanks Josh for that.
Couple of quick questions from me. Are you similar as taxi?
Similar to tax traders in the way you
Oh, it's, it, it, tax Traders is our other business.
Right? So Tax Traders is, so Taxi I, if you like,
sits on top of tax traders and builds further functionality
and capability for business. Okay,
Perfect. So, um,
I understand what you do.
So just in terms of your, I guess, submission today,
does it require legislative change?
'cause you've talked about an amendment? Yeah.
Or is it just, or is it just essentially a comms issue from
IRD not promoting this,
this optionality across the ecosystem?
Um, a comm, a comm, comms from IRD would help,
but the challenge we face with taxi is for, particularly
for these SMEs, is at the, at, at their point of need, they,
they reach us at their point of need saying,
I've gotta borrow, I need, uh, I need some funding.
If they haven't already got their tax in the tax system in,
in the, in the tax pool, say with tax traders
or one of the other intermediaries,
there's no legislative way for us to bring
that tax into the system so
that we can then unlock funding for them.
They have to have, under the current law, they have
to have made their, uh,
provisional tax payment into a tax pool,
say back in 28th of August or 7th of May this year.
So, but there is, by making a
legislative change, we could fix that.
Okay. And so you're,
your proposed legislative change would only be,
I'm assuming, quite a small amendment
or piece of piece of legislation that just maybe, um,
does a carve out or amend some dates?
Yeah, correct. It, it's, um, it basically speaks to the,
in your, um, for a current tax yet where you haven't
yet finalized your return.
So we're dealing with only provisional tax.
These are amounts people have paid in, uh,
but they haven't yet, uh, they haven't
yet filed their tax return, so we don't actually know
what their liability is.
So that's money they have.
Um, they, they've paid in advance, uh,
as the inland revenue requires them to do,
but it's still not yet determined
what their final liability is.
They would be able to bring those amounts
into, uh, the tax pool.
They could then, that can then be used
to support their business going forward.
Uh, as they, um, as though once they filed their return, um,
they've continued, they, they will have had time, time
to repay the loan down
and the money can then be bought back out
to match against the returns as they filed,
Um, through, through you chair.
I just wonder, Josh, and apologies if you have,
whether it's worth you just submitting, uh,
or talking to officials, you know, if you were
to draft a piece of legislation, what that might look like
so that, you know, whether it's whether we've got time
to do this at this point in time or not.
But that could be quite just to get, um, give, um,
the officials context in terms of how easy
or not it could be to within the scope
of what we're doing. Sure.
We have got, we have got the, uh, I, I can, I can check
with my, check with our legal team.
I believe we have actually drafted the,
the amendments to the clauses.
It, it, it's, uh, it's one
or two clauses, um, in the, in the tax act,
which will require a couple
of words inserted. It's very, okay,
Thank you. I'll leave that
to, to with the Clark
and team. Thank you. Thanks, chair.
Yep. Yep. Thank you. Thank you. Um, okay.
Any, anyone else? Okay, we'll leave it at that.
Um, Mr. Taylor, thank you for, um, your submission
and please, um, feel free to, um, uh, liaise
with the clerk's office over, over, you know, any, anything
as raised by, um, Ryan Hamilton.
Okay. Certainly, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, uh, committee members.
Okay, thank you. Okay. Right.
That gets gets us to, um, ha have, we've got, um,
Sam Blackman online, uh, as an individual.
Have we got, uh, we haven't got Tax Advisory Limited
online at the moment.
Uh, no, we don't. Sorry. Okay.
Well, let's, let's, let's go to, let's go to Sam.
He's, he's there willing and waiting.
Uh, he's got five minutes. Thank you.
Welcome, Sam, thank you for your, um, written submission
and we look forward to your five minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank you committee members.
Um, I'm here to speak
to you specifically about the foreign investment fund rules
and the amendments to them and the current bill
and their effect on migration, particularly
of entrepreneurial talent, including, uh, kiwi expats.
Now, I wanna, you've read my submission
and I wanna talk about the people in this,
in this oral submission with the time I have,
particularly two categories of people,
the people already in New Zealand, myself included,
and a group of people who these rules affect
and that these amendments actually miss.
Um, and then desirable migrants who are overseas,
including Kiwi expats
who are deeply interested in moving to New Zealand full-time.
But the rules, including the, the amendments, uh, continue
to present barriers to those people.
Um, so everyone, I'm gonna anonymize everyone
but myself happy to talk about myself
and take questions about my own situation.
Uh, but I know personally dozens of people
who fit into each of these categories
and more than happy to introduce you to them to,
if anyone's interested in speaking with them privately.
Um, a couple of examples.
Uh, a friend
and colleague of mine who helps in the startup ecosystem in
New Zealand mentoring startups, very successful person
with many successful startups in the United States
and spent more than a decade building startups in the us.
Um, through those successes in the us
invested at an early stage angel investments
and other startups in the US
and continues to have an illiquid portfolio
of angel investments
with time horizons from anywhere from kind of five
to 15 years, that person has moved back to New Zealand.
That person is ineligible for transitional tax residency
after accidentally triggering it
during COVID and not getting it back.
And that person is currently paying
tax under the cost method, quite a hefty sum
of tax each year,
and genuinely considering moving back to the US
because of the lack of cash flow
and the tax burden of these illiquid investments.
Um, that person's incredibly active with me
and in addition to me, in addition
to me in the startup ecosystem,
and the value that that person adds
to the startup ecosystem is immense.
Um, another person, uh, successful Kiwi entrepreneur,
successful in the New Zealand context,
sold a business offshore to a private company, uh,
for both a cash and equity deal.
That person has an exemption under section EX 36 right
now, but has no power, uh, for
that new parent company to kind
of subsume the assets of that company.
So the kind of the flip up provisions that are supposed
to protect people like that, if they change,
which they likely will in the coming years, that person too
will have cashflow issues.
And that person has said to me, if that happens,
that person will be moving offshore
because there is literally a, a, a gap of
a huge tax bill and, and no cashflow to pay for it.
And then myself. So I have recently returned to New Zealand
after more than a decade in the US building startups, uh,
on the east coast of the us.
Uh, my most recent startup, uh,
raised $80 million in US venture capital.
Um, the, the last, um, private valuation
of the preference shares in that company was $250 million.
Us. I hold still under 10% of that company.
Um, luckily I'm in my transitional period.
I'm about a year into my transitional tax residency.
If the rules were not to change, I would have
to leave New Zealand three years from now.
Thankfully, these amendments
actually remove the impossibility of me staying,
but there is still kind of a calculus at the end of
that three year period where my tax liability on my shares,
if they are to become liquid in the US, will essentially be
zero because of the qualified small business, uh,
stock regime in the us
And whatever the tax burden is in the us uh, in New Zealand,
including under these amendments, is whatever it will be.
And at the, at that period,
I'm gonna have to make a decision.
Do I go back to the US where there are plenty
of opportunities for me?
I have been accepted into a doctoral
program at Harvard Law School.
Um, I have indefinitely deferred
that pending the outcome of this legislation.
There are plenty of options in both the private sector
and academia for me to pursue in the us.
I wanna stay, I wanna raise my family in this country.
I'm a New Zealander at heart,
but there are still barriers including
in the current amendments.
Um, uh, so there, there's another category very briefly,
which is, uh, uh,
foreigners including in the US entrepreneur
who would move to New Zealand.
But for these, uh,
but for the fifth rules, again, the amendments
as they stand, they move the needle,
they remove the impossibility,
but, uh, they, I don't think they quite go far enough.
Um, plenty of Kiwi expats
who are not moving home because of them.
And likewise, plenty of people in my network, Americans
and other global citizens
with whom I've worked brilliant minds, who I would love
to in good faith say, Hey, come down to New Zealand
and build businesses with me,
but I can't under the current settings.
Um, I'll, I'll leave it with that. Um, okay.
And I'll open it up to questions.
Okay. Thank you Sam. L loud and clear.
Anyone, um, got a question, members?
No, you've obviously made your points, um, very clear, Sam,
so thanks for appearing
before the committee today and we'll leave it at that.
Thank you. Oh, we've got David Wilson there. Okay. Sorry.
We've got, we, we've got a last minute bid.
David, are you still, you still want
a question? 'cause we've got a little bit of time.
Great. Great. Um, thank you Sam, that was really good.
Can you sort of given, uh, us a taste of what, why, what,
or how the fifth rules, the changes
that are proposed have not gone far enough?
Can you tell us precisely what you think that is?
So, I, I, I would actually lean on, uh, NZ i's, uh,
submission in this regard in their report.
The biggest, so this kind of, the, the amendments work
for every jurisdiction, but the us
and that is predominantly
around the qualified small business stock regime.
Um, and of all of those people who are kind
of entwined in the US startup ecosystem, the, the, the,
uh, uh, their tax liability in the US under their
portfolio is drastically reduced.
And that regime in the US has just been amended.
The, the cap now, the exclusion cap is now $15 million us,
uh, for small, uh, qualified small business stock, um,
or 10 times basis for venture capital investors
or anyone investing.
So that's the biggest barrier.
Um, and I talk to people
who are entwined in the startup ecosystem
and they've got, you know, dozens
and dozens of illiquid portfolio companies,
and they're tossing up under the current regime.
They're tossing up, Hey,
do I pay 28% tax on any of these gains?
Or do I pay zero on this per company basis of,
uh, you know, dozens.
It's a per company exclusion per taxpayer,
per company exclusion.
And it just doesn't make sense.
So, hey, the, the bill as it stands,
great step in the right direction.
We are missing a huge swath of potential talent
who actually are ready, willing, enable,
and want to move to New Zealand
and give back to the startup ecosystem here,
including Kiwi expats.
Thank you. Yeah, and, and predominantly the
US I heard you say.
So that's interesting. We didn't get there
with NZIR, so thank you.
Oh, thank you Dr. Wilson. And thank you again, Sam,
we appreciate your, um, your submission.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you committee members.
Thank you. Very good.
Okay, uh, Mr. Clark, Liam, uh, who have we got?
Uh, yes, we've got, uh, Ms, uh,
Evans here, uh, for an individual.
Yes, that's right. Okay. Okay.
Charlotte, are you, you are there online? Yeah,
I'm here. Hi.
Okay. Um, That phone? Yeah.
Yep. No, you've got a five minute individual submission.
You can consider your, um, written one as read.
We look forward to it.
Okay, great. Thank you.
Uh, so my concern, uh, is with the clause
to permit regular disclosure
of sentenced revenue information.
Uh, in addition to the problem to clause that I mentioned,
a moment in submission, uh,
the clause undermines the right not to incriminate oneself
and thus undermines the right to a fair trial.
Uh, this is baked into the clause that the proposed section,
uh, 18 HB one B, um, which provides that.
One of the purposes is, uh,
and I quote, the detection investigation, prosecution
or punishment of suspected
or committed crimes punishable by terms
of imprisonment of two years or more.
Uh, the right not to incriminate oneself is a cornerstone,
the presumption of innocence.
The IUs is on the prosecution to prove
beyond reasonable doubt.
The heavy restrictions on what information police
and prosecutors can compel defendants
or prospective defendants to provide co history has shown
that these restrictions are essential
for the prevention of injustices.
These rights are so important that in many countries,
revolutions and civil wars have been
fought in order to obtain them.
Their importance cannot be overstated,
nor can the importance of ensuring they're robust
and cannot be subverted over this clause would provide an
insidious means to evade these safeguards
by exploiting the compulsory provision of tax information
when it's compulsory, provide tax information.
No amount of information, no matter
how minuscule could be allowed to escape to other agencies
for any purpose and least
of all in relation to prosecutions.
The clause also appears to enable fishing expeditions
by agencies such as police
and the Ministry of Social Development.
In other words, violating people's privacy without any good
reason or evidence on the off chance
that they might have done something wrong.
Treating people as guilty until proven innocent.
Now, this is not only a human rights violation,
but is also dangerous to normalize this type
of thinking in these agencies.
Uh, the clause does not recognize that some types
of information can be more
or less sensitive depending on
who the information relates to.
For example, the type of work a person does is generally not
highly sensitive of the person as a chef,
but is highly sensitive of the person as a sex worker.
Uh, current and former sex workers face significant
discrimination, not only in access to services,
but also in the quality of services that are provided
and in further violations of privacy within these agencies.
Some contexts such the health system
and the welfare system, it's far too easy
for a single prejudice individual to abuse the lack
of effective accountability mechanisms
and cause severe harm to a person.
In the case of the health system in particular,
this can kill through denial of treatment.
Even when this is not the case,
these agencies generally have no respect for privacy
and without a person, the entire organization,
if given the opportunity, the most effective way
to avoid all this is to not disclose that one is
or was a sex worker at these agencies.
As even when the agency has legitimate interest in knowing
the amount of money a person earns specific type of work
that person did to earn it is none these agencies business.
But the clause undermines that by providing the information
to be disclosed without the person's knowledge
or consent in relation
to information people have already given to IRD,
this would be nothing less than a betrayal passing.
The bill with this clause would also send them message
that the best course of action in future is
to avoid disclosing sensitive information
to any agency under any circumstances,
even under the strongest legislative, sorry,
even under the strongest legislative protections.
'cause there's always a risk of an amendment like this in
future, we live in a time where fits to privacy
and more numerous, more insidious, more extensive
and more dangerous than ever before,
and we need stronger privacy protections to match them.
This clauses the exact opposite of what we need, undermining
what few and flimsy protections we have,
but also in a time with increasing number
of conspiracy theories
and increasing number of people subscribing
to those conspiracy theories.
Once a person falls down,
that rabbit hole is very difficult to get them back.
The last thing we need is to give people legitimate reason
to distrust the government, driving them in the arms
of those conspiracy theorists.
And that's pretty much all I have to say,
but, uh, you know, I recommend the
cause be removed from the bill. Thank you.
Okay. No, you've made that, um, uh,
very clear in both submissions, um, members, any, any,
any questions for Ms. Evans?
Okay, we'll leave it at that. Thank, thank you, Charlotte.
Appreciate, appreciate you coming in. Thank you. Thank you.
And all the best. Um, okay.
Who's who, who have we got next, Mr. Um, Clark?
Um, we just have Will Lau left,
but I note that he's dialing in from Hong Kong.
We may not have joined early yet,
so we don't have any submitters lined up at the moment.
Okay. We didn't have Amanda Martin from
Tax Advisory Limited.
No, no, they're withdrew. Okay.
Uh, and then we, then we don't have the, uh, then we,
then we break and we will have, um, uh,
at 1230 we'll have our first hearing
for the performance reporting inquiry, won't we?
That's right. Okay.
Um, well, should we just maybe members, we can just let,
let's, let's give this, maybe even turn your, uh,
videos and microphones off.
Let's just pause for five
or 10 minutes and see if he turns up.
If, if um, will doesn't turn up,
we'll break for half an hour.
So just give us, give five or 10 minutes. Thank you.
Sorry. And looking somebody
with senior long term management experience
Members in fairness to others.
We'll just give it another 90 seconds till we clock onto
noon, and then we'll, um, we'll hear from Will,
unless everyone appears.
Oh, will. And
Hello. Yeah.
Can you guys hear me?
Hi, will. Uh, we're just waiting on Nui, uh, NUIA.
Walers, but, uh, Nui Walers,
but, um, I'm sure she won't be too far away.
You are in Hong Kong. What's happening in Hong Kong?
What's, what's your walk over there? Oh, here's Nui.
It's, it's lovely over here this summer
of year, you know, the weather's great.
Bit like New Zealand summer.
Yeah. And, um, uh, we've very, can
I just jump in to ask how's the fire situation?
Yeah, well, was just gonna say we're very sorry
to hear about that tragedy.
Mm mm mm I haven't been following it, actually.
I just heard about it last yesterday afternoon.
Um, I, I don't think it,
I think it's a bit overland in the media,
but, um, haven't looked into the details really.
Um, too busy in meetings.
Um, 36 people are dead, so that's not Oh, really? Yeah. And
2 37 missing, so, Oh, missing.
Yeah, it was three buildings involved weren't there?
Um, Kevin. Okay. So look, let's get onto the business.
Um, well thank you for your, uh, submission.
You've got five minutes coming in from, uh, Hong Kong.
Uh, wanna welcome our green member, Steve Abel.
Nice to see you, Steve. Uh, and so we're in your hands, will
Okay. Thank you. Committee.
Um, I will, uh,
just cover an introduction about myself and my situation.
Most of the details are in the submission.
Um, now I've, I'm an engineer.
I'm a technology, um, guy, right?
And so my first, um, instance of this was founding, um,
a startup, which we brought to New Zealand, um,
and ran outta Auckland at,
generated multiple million dollars of, uh, revenue, um,
profit, actually, um, over three short years.
Um, and since that time, I've been in the tech world.
Um, these days I operate out of Hong Kong here.
Um, we build, um, my expertise is in, uh,
emerging technology, financial technology.
Now that's around digital assets.
Um, we build, um,
investment products here outta Hong Kong.
Um, some of it is in conjunction
with a Swiss private bank in, in Switzerland,
institutional products.
Uh, we also have, um, business intelligence, um,
market intelligence, um, businesses running out
of Switzerland.
Um, now I left New Zealand in 2015
and started building businesses overseas.
Now, now, um, I have a family now, a young family,
and we bought a, um, news, a holiday home in New Zealand,
um, to enjoy the summers.
And that inadvertently triggered, um,
the DTA meaning.
Um, I am now a jewel Hong Kong
and New Zealand tax resident falling on the Hong Kong
side of the DTA.
Um, I was away for eight years, so I do not qualify
for the transitional, um, tax residency.
Um, and part of the activities that I do, um,
is being a founder
and being, um, understanding the early venture space.
I'm an angel investor
and my position in the industry, um, is, is well known.
Um, I have a 1.25 million followers on Twitter.
Um, I advise a lot of startups.
Um, so I have a lot of access to early stage deal flow.
Um, and some of the things I'd like
to do is support the next generation of founders
that are gonna build the, the
financial rails for the future.
Um, relatively, um, active in this.
And it has been ramping up.
Now we have made a decision to return to New Zealand.
'cause our kids, um, it's time for them to go to school.
Um, it's the happiest time of the year for our family.
Um, and even in Queenstown,
there's a international community of entrepreneurs I think
that we would fit in with.
Um, I'd like to build businesses in New Zealand, um,
and continue the activity of supporting offshore, um,
startup ventures.
Um, some of the successes might be, um, Exodus movement,
which was a seed investment
that is now a publicly traded unicorn on the New York,
New York Stock Exchange.
American market. Um,
and this, this, this type of activity, um,
under the current fifth rules,
because I don't have access to the RAM method of accounting,
will mean that I will have a, um, a,
a cashflow drag of every investment that i I make in,
into these early stage ventures.
Bear in mind that a liquid, it'll take 10 years for then
to get to a liquidity event.
90% will fail.
So I'll be paying taxes on my whole portfolio, which
is majority will fail.
And so this activity will not be sustainable for me,
even though it's very profitable in the long term for myself
and the New Zealand government.
Um, if I have access to the RAM method that solves this,
because I will not need to, um,
pay taxes on unrealized gains of these illiquid instruments.
Um, so really that's, um, the summary is I would, uh,
recommend that the RAM method,
which is relatively straightforward
and low in compliance costs.
Um, this is kind of a key to attracting, um,
worldwide capital to actually embed into New Zealand.
Um, I have friends that are in the venture space.
They have left New Zealand. Um, they came in from overseas.
I have friends that are inside the, um,
Silicon Valley elite circles that are running venture funds.
I have allocations for these funds.
Um, I am very dis incentivized to, um, continue
to allocate into, um, those ventures
because of the taxation, um, treatment.
And I, I just think that, um, if New Zealand wants
to attract the, the smart capital
and have a stake in the world, um, economy
that's growing the fastest within the tech space, um,
we really wanna attract that
and not penalize, um, the, the capital that lands here
and wants to embed into the ecosystem.
Okay. Thank you. Loud and clear.
Um, members, any questions for Will?
Okay, well, we'll leave it at that.
All the best with your, the,
the rest of your time in Hong Kong.
And thank you for your submission
and, uh, coming into us, uh,
Okay. Via Zoom today.
Thank you. Thank
All. Thank you committee.
Thanks for the opportunity. Members.
Members, we will break for a unforeseen, uh, given
that we did the financial markets conduct amendment bill,
uh, before we will break, uh, for a, um, for a lunch
and, uh, resume ready to go, uh,
for an individual submission at 1230.
Sorry, Cameron, don't we need to speak to the IR officials
and direct them to prepare a report and things like that.
And there's probably some issues we want
them to come back to us on.
Yes, we do. Deborah, you are right.
Yeah, I was gonna leave that till the end of the meeting,
but I suppose we've got all the officials queued up here.
Yeah. Um, so we, uh, we do need to advise, ask the advisors
to, um, prepare a departmental report. A Liam
Yeah. I just forgive the
committee moves
into private session to do that.
Okay. Um, uh, should we do that now? Yeah. Yes.
And that we've got, given
that you've got, we've got officials.
Yep. Okay. Okay. Sorry. We'll go, we'll go to private.
Thank you.